74 ΘΚΑ TIO PHILIPPICA SECUNDA. [X1132

descriptive genitive after summa ‘this is my ultimate conclusion’.
Cicero’s syllogism is as followsz—-They must be either liberators or
parricides: you aequit thern of crime (and so admit that they are not
parricides): therefore you judge thern worthy (as liberators) of the
highest rewards.

‘24 retexo] ‘undo ’, ‘cancel', cp. Hor. Sat. 11. 3. 2 scriptorum quaeque
retexens. The argument is :—I have been trying to show you that Ι was
not an accomplice or a confidant of the conspirators3 I withdraw that
line os argument now and am willing to be thought to have had a share
in so glorious a deed; I will write and tell them not to deny my com-
plicity is they are asked about it.

ut...ne cui negent] on the use of ut ne where the simple ne would
apparently be sufficient see Madvig F in. 11. 15, Reid Sull. 27.

2 5 sitne] notice ne in an indirect interrogation = ‘whether ⁹.

26 celatum] masculine, agreeing with me, ‘that I should have been kept
in ignorance of it ’. Translate ‘for I sear that either my being kept in
ignorance of the deed was not creditable to themselves, or that my
having shirked when invited to participate was most disgraceful to me'.
With celatum supply mentally some such expression as lianc rem or
de lzac re3 the two constructions being allowable—celor lzanc rem or
celor de liae re.

28 prol] this word may stand by itself as here, or may take an accu-
sative (limited perhaps to the word fidem).

30 commendatior] followed by dative, in ἓ 1 we had commendationem ad
impios civz's.
31 consili societatem] cp. 25 societate facti.

ἓ 33.

p. 13. 2 qnid beatius] for quis beatzor3 the usual sorm of expression when
the question is not asked with reference to actual persons; contrast Lael.

42 quis clarior in Graecia Themistocle, quis potentior where the meaning

is ‘who (i.e. what actual historical personage) was more illustrious’, διο.

3 relegatos] Antony's assertion that he had driven out the conspirators
is hardly correct. It was rather the dread of popular resentment‚ in-
flamed no doubt by Antony’s harangues, that led them to leave Rome

in April. [relegatio is banishment by an arbitrary act, either exercised
by a paterfamilias against his son or slave or by a magistrate. In the
Republic magistrates could only legally expel peregrini. The action e.g.

